Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
It's easy now, after 13 years, to talk about
that when all of it’s well known to you.
Do you remember the moment when you
came to the locker room for the first time
at the Santiago Bernabeu Stadium?
I never played for Real Madrid,
not did I work there as a coach.
However, the late Radomir Antić,
who was the coach of Atletico,
Real and Barcelona, said that the atmosphere
at Bernabeu simply "swallows" you.
Do you remember the moment when you
first came? -Of course I remember.
I felt that atmosphere in the stadium
when we played against Tottenham
in the quarter-finals
of the Champions League.
During the warm-up, while Čarli
and I were warming up,
at one moment I approached him
and told him that I felt
as if the crowd was right
on top of my head.
I looked around and couldn't
believe where I was.
It’s an unbelievable feeling.
So I can understand the teams
that come to play against Real.
And how hard it’s and what respect
they have for Real
when they play against it.
And that’s the difference that Real
has compared to other clubs.
Despite the fact that Real's fans
aren't known for being ultra loud.
That's right, but when necessary,
they know how to be. They're more like...
They’re good, they’re not ultra loud,
except when playing matches
against strong opponents.
Then their support is phenomenal.
As if they’re "pushing the bus".
-That's right.
But that experience at
the Bernabeu is truly incredible.
That feeling of awe is hard to describe.
It’s hard to explain it until
you walk out to play on the pitch.
That feeling is really something special.
And whether I remember the moments
when I came for the first time.
On the first day, I did the medical check up
and everything that was necessary.
And I went to the stadium
so I could be presented.
The same afternoon we had training,
I entered the Valdebebas camp.
Iker Casillas was the first to meet me
outside locker room and welcomed me.
He told me to feel at home and
feel free to say whatever I needed.
We had the usual conversation.
Then, when I entered the locker room,
I saw the best players in the world.
My God. -Cristiano, Karim,
Higuain, Xabi Alonso.
I found Cristian while he was
on the massage table,
and he told me the following:
"Finally, you’ve arrived".
Because the whole procedure
for my transfer took two months.
I walked in among the best players
in the world. -But you still thought...
I came to impose myself...
-You knew you belonged there.
... and to prove I didn't come by accident.
So I was just thinking about that.
However, you didn’t do preseason with
them because of the transfer procedure.
That's why your play wasn't
great at the very beginning.
In those moments,
while all of that was happening...
Especially because you’re not
the type who attracts attention
with things happening off the pitch.
With some trendy bag when arriving
for training, designer shoes,
or maybe a hairstyle.
Giving interviews.
You’re one of those players
who show everything on the pitch.
However, at that moment you didn’t
have many chances on the pitch,
except in training. But in matches
you didn’t have them.
It's easy to talk about it now
after everything has passed,
but people need to know that in Real
they don't suffer oscillations in the game.
It’s a club where they call you out
immediately after bad games.
In those moments, did you regret
not moving to Chelsea
or perhaps staying in Tottenham?
Or are you someone who always
fights for his place in the team?
Not for a moment did I regret.
I was happy to come to such a club.
That I could train with those players.
To be in such a club.
Right away during training
I felt that I belonged there.
There I realized that is it. I also
played against some of those players
and felt I during the matches
that I could play them.
I knew from the first moment
that I belonged there
and I never doubted
that I would not succeed.
No matter how hard it was
in the beginning, and regardless
of the fact that sometimes
I played and sometimes I didn't.
That year Real didn’t have a good start.
-Mourinho was the coach? -Yes, he was.
He was the most deserving
for me coming to Real.
If he hadn’t been the coach
I might never have come to Real.
He wasn’t looking for a midfielder,
he was looking for Luka Modrić.
He was looking for me
and no one else.
During that period
of negotiations,
the club offered him
various other players,
because they thought
my transfer wouldn’t happen.
I want to thank the president of Tottenham
because he kept his promise.
Although those months were painful
for me, I also felt a lot of stress.
I didn't play games, and I didn't even know
if my transfer to Real would happen.
In the end, the Tottenham
president kept his promise,
but negotiating with him
was really difficult.
Something similar happened to Keane...
-And with Bale, Keane, Berbatov.
A lot of players went through
a similar situation.
Because of that situation,
at one point Real
started thinking about other players
like Silva, Mata, Cazorla.
However, at that moment
Mourinho was respected,
and president Florentino
liked him and still does.
He also won the championship?
-He won the title with a record number
of points. Mourinho said:
"Either Luka or nobody."
And that made the difference. He could
have said he didn’t want to wait,
but he still decided on me.
Because of that I’m very grateful.
We still sometimes talk on the phone.
I'm always happy to see him.
I regret that I didn't have the chance
to work with him more than one year.
Were you angry at him because at first
you didn’t play in the starting eleven?
I wasn't angry. He talked to me a lot
and told me to be patient.
After a period when I would play
a match, in my opinion well.
However, after 60 or 55 minutes
he would substitute me.
In one match, after only
the first half, I had to come off.
In some later matches
I only got 10 minutes.
At one point it became
frustrating for me.
Because I knew I was playing well.
I felt through the matches
that I was playing well.
At that moment, the atmosphere
in the club wasn’t the best either.
As much as I didn't understand
Spanish, I could feel it.
Despite the fact that he didn't talk
to me, his assistants did talk.
Rui Faria, after a match we played
against Deportivo La Coruna,
in which I was substituted
in the 55th or 60th minute.
The next day he came to check on me.
Do I need anything, how I feel.
If anything bothered me, etc.
At that moment, I told him everything
that was bothering me. Because
I knew he would tell Mourinho.
On that occasion I told him everything.
I told him: "Let me play four or
five games in a row, and if I don't do
what is expected, I will never complain.
I only ask for this to have continuity.
If I don’t meet your conditions,
you can do whatever you want."
He then told me: "Don't worry,
we're more than satisfied with you.
Whenever you play, we're satisfied.
Don't worry, your time will come."
After that, the situation improved.
This conversation happened sometime
in February, before the Champions League
match against Manchester.
-That was the match. -After that goal.
Did my conversation and confidence help?
Confidence and belief in myself when I said
I wanted to play several matches in a row
so I could show what kind of player I am.
I came to play. After that talk,
maybe my status changed,
and I started getting more minutes. After
that came the match against Manchester.
Which was crucial for me. -When
Nani got sent off and you scored.
I shouldn't have even entered the game.
Kaká came on if I’m not mistaken.
I almost entered the pitch
without a substitution made.
I couldn't wait for Mourinho
to invite me into the game.
After that he called me, I came in,
and what happened, happened.
After that match, the others
and even the journalists...
After that match everything
turned around. -That's right.
It would probably happen later,
but that match was...
That’s exactly what I wanted to say.
Of course, even great players
need that factor of luck
for things to turn their way,
to score a goal, etc.
The same would happen after seven,
fifteen days or three weeks after that.
There is no doubt about that.
After that, the flow begins.
The following year,
Carlo Ancelotti came as coach
and you won La Decima,
which you say is special.
A special Champions League
out of all six I’ve won.
Because it was the tenth,
and I really love the number ten.
You played Atletico Madrid.
-Yes, against Atletico.
In the 90th minute you assisted Ramos.
-I think it was the 93rd minute.
It was truly incredible.
And that was a good example
of what kind of club Real is,
that they never give up on winning.
Regardless of problems,
players always believe
they can do something.
At that moment, that match
was the perfect example,
and earlier in Real’s history
there were many similar matches.
How come you didn't stop then?
It’s like you became addicted to winning.
After winning the title,
you didn't stop there.
You just kept going further and further.
As a team you became obsessed.
You won the Champions League six times.
You beat Atletico twice, Liverpool twice.
Then Juventus and Borussia Dortmund.
-That's right. -You have won six times.
Yes, that's incredible.
-It was like you pushed each other.
We were hungry for success.
Real simply gives you that.
When we won the 10th Champions League,
and they start talking about the 11th.
You think, we just won the 10th,
let us enjoy it a little.
A player at Real has no time to enjoy it,
because they are asking for the next.
Right away they begin talking
about the next Champions League,
because it’s something special
for them. -That’s Real. -Exactly.
When we start preparations
for next season,
and if we lose two pre-season matches,
the question is asked why it happened.
If a player isn’t good enough,
he’s replaced immediately.
That is something incredible.
Did you become the ultimate
professional at Real?
Put aside the fact that you always
liked playing football.
Did playing in that environment
contribute... I'll explain.
Vidić once said, when leaving
Spartak, also a big club...
He played for Zvezda, and also in Russia.
Spartak was the biggest club in the USSR.
He once said the biggest shock
at Manchester United
was that after training no players
were in the locker room.
Next day he found himself
in the same situation.
Because all players behaved
professionally: one getting a massage,
another in the gym,
Rooney practicing free kicks.
That’s when he learned that after training
you don’t go to the shower and then home.
That's how you become
the ultimate professional.
I know you loved football since childhood,
but did Real teach you that?
Definitely, I can say it did.
After the second or third year
at Real, I hired a trainer.
Probably because the others
also trained with a personal trainer.
Because everyone else works extra.
You said earlier, none of them
went straight to the shower
after training and then home.
Or to lunch, or anywhere else.
They would go to the gym,
massage, play basketball,
tennis or badminton.
They were always active.
-They are active. -Yes.
I always loved training and working,
but at Real I hired a conditioning coach
to improve my physical ability. To prevent
injuries. -You did it as precaution.
Real forces you into that.
-Yes, you’re right.
When you see great players
training, you just can't go home.
And when players in the
national team see you training,
they also won’t go sit in the bus.
Your coaches were Mourinho,
Ancelotti, Benitez, Zidane.
Did they have anything in common?
Or something that made them unique?
Each of them is special in his own way.
I don't like to compare people,
because every coach has
his own way of working.
Every coach has his own
character, his personality.
One is very close with
the team, another not.
Some of them work
much more on tactics.
Some cooperate more with the players.
It's hard for me to compare them,
but from each of them...
-You I learned a lot. -A lot.
Very much. I have a special
feeling towards Mourinho.
He brought you to Real. -Yes.
And other things I already said.
He was the person most
responsible for me coming to Real.
If it weren't for him, maybe it would
never have happened.
With Carlo, that first spell was incredible.
When we won La Decima,
the Copa del Rey, and later
when he came back,
we won two more Champions Leagues.
We also won La Liga twice.
He’s a very special person. As a man
and as a coach, he is extraordinary.
Benitez stayed a short time,
but I learned from him too.
With Zizou, we won three Champions
Leagues in a row. -He is special.
He is unbelievable. Just his
arrival in the locker room,
the way he greeted us, for us players
that was something special.
When we were kids,
we watched him on TV.
He is one of the best players
in football history,
and now he was supposed
to be your coach.
He came, greeted us,
and we started training.
Regardless of the fact
he was Carlo’s assistant
when we won the 10th
Champions League title.
Then he went to coach youth categories
and returned after two years.
But this time as head coach. As assistant
he was more withdrawn, more reserved.
But as head coach he was
really phenomenal.
And we didn’t win three Champions
Leagues in a row by accident.
He has a special aura.
He knows football well.
He didn’t try to invent much, he knew
exactly what the team needed.
Because he had been a player
and knew what must be done.
He understood the quality
of the players he had.
He gave us freedom, but there
were things he demanded.
He rotated the players a lot.
-That's right.
His philosophy was that every player
is important. And it truly is so.
He didn't just say that,
he showed it in action.
Even the one who played the least
still played at least 15 to 20 matches.
Yes, and you have to win
every match. -You’re right.
That period with him was really special.
He also played football with us
during training. Small goals.
It was great. -Yes. Maybe he couldn’t
run much, but his quality was clear.
His game was like ballet.
No one has ever played football
like that. -He was a special player.
Also, he was honest.
And I value that in a coach.
Mourinho was like that too, he tells
you right away what he thinks.
He immediately tells you
where you make mistakes.
He doesn't hesitate to tell
any player where he’s wrong.
He is direct and straightforward. If he
promises something, it really happens.
These are giants who are complete.
You know when people say Ancelotti
doesn't know much about tactics,
that he... That's not true at all.
That's simply not the case.
Those are stupid things.
Those are prejudices. -He knows
everything about tactics.
But he chooses certain things
because he’s the coach in Madrid.
He knows what kind of players he has,
so he won’t push you too hard.
He won’t insist on tactics,
he’ll focus on something else.
These are people who know
everything very well.
They know absolutely
everything about football.
Football was invented
long ago. -That's right.
There is no need to complicate
and try the impossible. -That's right.
Today everything is getting
more complicated,
you no longer know what
anyone is saying. -That is correct.
With every success your familly grows
as well. You have three children.
You once told me that you all
became so accustomed to Madrid,
especially the children, that when you
asked them whether you should go home,
"home" for them meant Madrid.
That is completely natural,
and it's the same for you. -Yes.
To be honest, it's the same for me.
Of course, I love Zadar.
I spend my summers there,
enjoy time with my friends,
we play cards, we go swimming,
everyday things. But when you say,
"When are we going home?"
or when they ask, they mean Madrid,
they've lived their entire lives there.
Ivano was with us in London for 2 years,
but Sofi and Ema have practically
lived their whole lives in Madrid, as
has Ivano. So for them, home is Madrid,
their friends, their school,
everything is there.
And when you look at it,
as we mentioned earlier,
the longest continuous period you've
spent anywhere hasn't been in Zagreb
or in Zadar... -I was in Zadars until I
turned 15... -... but really in Madrid.
Yes, it is Madrid.
And it's a great city, isn't it?
And when you look at it...
You mentioned the first time
you walked into the dressing room.
Is it, in a way, one of Real Madrid's
secrets that constant renewal?
What I want to ask is: did you miss the
players with whom you won everything?
The other day, I put this down on paper
when I was thinking about all this...
Casillas left, Pepe left, then Arbeloa
left, then Ramos, later Marcelo,
then Ronaldo, Bale, Kroos,
and Higuaín, right? -Yes, yes.
But then new players arrive, and not
just anyone, the very best come in...
Those are exceptional players.
-Did you miss the old ones a lot?
Yes, especially some with whom
I built an incredible relationship,
which I still have today,
both family-wise and as close friends.
When Marcelo left, I missed him a lot.
Sergio, Mateo... -Mateo. -Mateo.
Well, yes, but Mateo
also wanted to leave.
And generally, at Real,
they push you out, right?
Yes, at Real, they do push you out.
-Like you said earlier about Rodrygo...
You don't leave unless they push you
out. -And Mateo wanted to play.
He wanted to play, even though,
in my opinion, he played a lot.
In that period at Real, he was,
in my view, one of the best players,
although he may disagree. Even
if he wasn't the main protagonist
the whole time, he played outstanding
matches and was very important.
He wanted to be the protagonist,
to be on the pitch constantly,
the way Toni, Casemiro and I were,
but he still played phenomenal football.
It was hard for me when he left because
Mateo is someone truly special to me.
From the very beginning, from the moment
he came to the national team,
we created an exceptional relationship,
a chemistry that lasts to this day,
even after he left Real.
At Real, we became even closer,
but often when someone leaves,
paths naturally separate.
With him, it became even stronger.
Even stronger, actually.
So it's not just a friendship,
but also a bond through family ties,
and because of that, you miss all those
players who left at certain moments.
But that's simply how it is,
and you get used to it.
I'm thinking now,
is there that dual positive effect?
On one hand, new world-class players
arrive, after all it's Real Madrid,
and their arrival brings new motivation
and a fresh impulse to the team.
On the other hand, no matter how much
you've won as a Real Madrid player,
the fact that the club regularly moves
players on creates additional pressure:
you have to be at your best
at all times if you want to stay.
There is no moment of easing off,
no sense of "I'll slow down a little."
There's none of that in Real.
They simply do not tolerate mediocrity.
If they sense that you are
even slightly below your level,
they immediately start
looking for other solutions.
The competition is enormous,
and you really have to be at the top.
Because someone behind you is waiting
for you to play one bad match
so he can step in. But in a healthy way.
-Yes, yes, of course.
It's a daily pressure, a constant
expectation that you need to be
at the top, because if you're not,
others will come.
That's simply the nature of the job.
I managed to stay for long time.
From that perspective
happy and proud that,
I am highly competitive. Whoever arrives,
especially when younger players come in,
the talk has been that the older ones
should slowly be moved aside.
That has been said since
the World Cup in Russia.
That actually gave me extra motivation
to show that I can still keep up
with the younger players
and that I am still 'that guy'.
That competition motivated me
and kept me at this level.
Your role on the pitch is,
objectively speaking, extraordinary.
What you do on the pitch...
Actually, this is where
I wanted to ask you something.
You are a creator, an artist,
a genius, but at the same time,
you are also the player
who does all the "other" work.
How do you enter that special zone?
Of course, you prepare for a match
and analyze other professionals.
Do you enter some kind of trance?
Some kind of madness.
You can't go into "madness,"
that's for Vinicius or some other forward
who can disappear for 80 minutes
and then appear for 10 minutes,
and you are not that type.
You can win a match with a goal,
very often with an assist,
but your role is much bigger.
You control the tempo, the rhythm,
the pulse of the match. You decide
where and how the game will be played
for all 90 minutes, without a pause...
And you've been doing it
every three days for 20 years.
And we're talking about Real,
where, as you just said,
there is no credit, and where everyone
expects everything from you:
your teammates, the coach,
the management, the media, the fans,
and ultimately you yourself.
How do you enter that state?
It's simply a state
that is hard to explain...
Everything around you seems not to
exist-only the pitch, the ball,
your teammates, and you are
entirely focused on that.
No distraction can pull you out of it.
That is where I feel most comfortable.
When you have problems, you come onto
the pitch, and you forget everything.
You feel most comfortable on the pitch?
-Yes. You forget everything.
If you have a problem, God forbid,
you come onto the pitch,
and for those 90 minutes or more,
nothing else exists.
Only the ball, the pitch, the players...
-Do you know what Maradona said?
Sorry to interrupt.
Do you know what he said?
Maradona said the only time he rests is
during the match. He rests.
Everything else is exhaustion.
-Yes, yes. That's why I say,
when you are on the pitch,
nothing else exists.
You are aware that
expectations are enormous,
and you know you must remain calm.
As a midfielder, you cannot
wait for your 10 minutes,
you have to be at the highest
level the entire time,
maintain the team's balance, organize
it, show that they can rely on you,
that you are calm, composed, that
you give support to your teammates,
guide them, and advise them.
That is my role on the pitch.
Goals and, let's say, the headline roles
belong to Ronaldo and Benzema
more than to midfielders. But without
the midfield, a team can hardly perform,
it cannot maintain balance or quality.
There's a reason why people say the
midfield always decides everything.
The only sport where the center
is the most crucial part.
It is the most important,
that's right. You have to be...
When you walk out for a match, and
this has been going on for years now,
where do you see your advantage? Where
do you spot that you are the player,
that you have something
your opponent does not have?
I don't know, that's... -Where do you
feel that strength during the match?
I think it's in recognizing situations
on the pitch. -That's it, exactly.
Yes. That's where I make the difference,
because sometimes I see things
before they actually happen.
So I think that is, let's say,
a difference compared to others,
but it is difficult to talk about myself.
But that's exactly it...
-And I don't like talking about myself.
I believe my character is
also fundamental there.
I am a fighter, I never give up,
I never see defeat as final.
Even when a situation seems hopeless,
I always think that a solution
can be found, that something
can be done, that things can improve.
I will never say it is over,
that there is no way out,
there is always something
that can be done.
So that character, and that mindset...
-Well, that's it.
That is precisely it, that is character
and everything that comes with it,
your anticipation,
understanding of the game,
reading of the game in both phases,
even more so in the defensive phase,
when you almost know where the ball
will drop. Like Rodman or Barkley,
they weren't the tallest, yet they had
the most rebounds because they knew
where the ball would land.
And you are like that...
This has followed you from the
beginning, that "What is he exactly?",
but in a positive sense, even back
when you were in the youth setup.
If you're a number 10,
then it's a shame you're not deeper,
a shame you're not lower on the pitch
because you're so good on the ball.
If you play deeper, then it's a shame
you're not closer to the goal
for that final pass or the finish.
I think it was Bielsa who said,
"Is he a 6, an 8, or a 10? He's
a 24-he's all of that in one". -Yes.
You were always, in a way,
ahead of your time.
But what is also very interesting
and should be underlined is
how your role at Real has grown.
You arrived at Real Madrid,
already then the best-known,
biggest club in the world, to strengthen
the quality and competition
in midfield in 2012, right? -Yes.
-Xabi Alonso, Khedira, and Özil
were already there. And then
another player arrives - you.
From that point, you become
a starter, a protagonist,
the director and main creator,
a captain, a mentor, everything.
None of that was handed to you,
you had to build it all step by step
over these thirteen years.
Let's say everything unfolded
in its own natural way.
There were highs and lows, of course.
-Turbulences, naturally.
But I think everything went
the way it was meant to go.
I believe I would choose the same path
again, I wouldn't change anything.
So, I guess it all progressed
exactly as it should have, step by step,
without skipping any stages.
Regarding my positions on the pitch,
I think it helped me a lot
that throughout my career, in the
youth categories and later at Zrinjski
and Inter, I played in
several different roles.
I wasn't just a central or
right midfielder, for example,
I played as a second striker
and left winger in a 4-4-2 or 4-3-3.
And as a winger... -... and in a 4-4-2
as one of two midfielders,
and I even played right wing
for Zrinjski at the beginning.
So I played as a second striker,
and I switched positions constantly.
The first ones who put me in
the defensive midfield role
were you and Harry Redknapp. -Yes.
-Into that central position. -Yes, yes.
Which in England was a big surprise.
-It takes a sort of a "palacio"...
So that helped me a lot in becoming good
defensively and in reading the game.
All that mixing of positions,
I think, helped enormously.
That is your special quality on
the pitch. I was at those matches.
I was at those matches,
I saw them up close,
and that's why I never understood
where those debates come from.
In that exact match Real against
Chelsea, when you won in London,
and when Benzema scored
a hat-trick... -... 3-1.
... and then took matters
into his own hands in Madrid...
That match was the one where you gave
Rodrygo that incredible assist
with the outside of your right foot,
one of the best you've ever produced.
And it's not just me saying that, Rio
Ferdinand and half the world said that.
However, in that match, what I was
seeing was something else entirely:
the way you marked Rüdiger
on set pieces, at corners,
back when he was still
a Chelsea player.
You didn't do it asking yourself,
"Why am I marking Rüdiger?"
Even though he's taller
and physically stronger,
you marked him exactly
the way he needed to be marked.
You made his game difficult,
and you were precise in every duel.
And in the same match,
after taking a corner,
you were the furthest player forward,
and you stopped their counterattack.
That shows your completeness. And that's
why it surprises me when someone asks,
"Is he this or that?"
Because the truth is very simple,
you are all of it at once.
You are everything.
Yes... And from a young age, I learned
responsibility in life in general,
which naturally translated onto
the pitch. I left Zadar on my own,
I had to manage everything myself,
make my own breakfast, figure out
lunch and dinner... and that
responsibility I carried off the pitch,
that is exactly how I am on the pitch
as well. -And that is the whole story,
that's exactly what we've been
talking about here.
You had one pair of Ronaldo's shin
guards, and instinctively you knew...
You had one pair, and three days later,
you didn't show up asking for a pair
from Rooney, then one from Beckham,
then losing a pair and saying,
"It doesn't matter, Stipe will
get me new ones from Boban..."
You know, if you don't
throw away a slice of bread,
and if your shin guards matter, then
every ball in a match also matters.
I've said this a hundred times.
I coached you, and I saw how you reacted
in training, which I never told you,
but I've said it to a 1000 other people,
when you lost the ball in training,
and by your standard, which is extremely
high, you shouldn't have lost it,
you went mad. And I'm talking
about training, not a match.
What level of responsibility is that...
-And it's still like that today.
Even today... And when someone
makes a mistake, and the cameras
catch your reaction, you get upset.
What's wrong? -Yes, yes. -That's it.
I can be a perfectionist at times,
but of course, you can't be perfect,
though I try... -You should strive for it.
-Yes, you should strive for it.
Luka, you're speaking brilliantly.
This is fantastic.
Truly phenomenal reflections.
Now, Real aside for a moment...
Let's go to the national team.
We touched on 2006, 2008,
2010, unfortunately, we weren't there,
then 2012, and before Russia,
there were the 2014 World Cup in Brazil
and the 2016 Euro in France.
In Brazil, that... How did you
see those two tournaments?
The World Cup in Brazil
and the Euro in France...
Well, the World Cup in Brazil...
Let's say this without
calling anyone out now:
it was our worst tournament and
the worst atmosphere the national team
has ever seen. From the beginning,
you could feel we had no chance
of achieving anything,
no progress, you could sense it.
I was there, it was after
the end of the season with Real.
I came in extremely exhausted,
it had been a long season,
and I played practically without rest.
My worst tournament, without...
I've never liked hiding behind excuses,
and I said the same thing back then,
after the tournament. But the
environment and atmosphere in the team
had never been worse. There were,
let's say, specific groups.
Which is strange for the national team,
because usually it's balanced, united...
We always talk about and pride ourselves
on that atmosphere, that environment,
that unity which gives us strength
and which carried us to our
biggest successes, because without that,
there is no chance, you can forget it.
You can have quality, but without unity,
you can forget about achieving results.
But in that tournament, we simply...
We weren't a group,
we didn't have togetherness,
and we finished the way we finished.
At the next Euro in France,
we played excellent football,
and the atmosphere was much better.
That sense of unity returned,
but even then, among us players...
We still weren't entirely on ideal terms.
We somehow managed to fix it
and put ourselves at the service
of the national team,
trying to get the best result.
We were very close. We missed
by little against Portugal.
We played well. Against Turkey
we played excellent,
we beat Spain. Against the Czechs
we played fantastic 60 minutes,
until that interruption. -Yes, yes.
-Then Portugal came.
We had chances and
good situations to win.
Probably it wasn’t the time
or it wasn’t meant to be.
We went out to the future champs.
Had we won, the draw ahead
would have opened for us
to go all the way, like 2012.
Had we passed the group,
we’d have gone all the way. Sure.
But... -But we showed
very good football.
Quite painful... Not like 2008 shock,
but again last minute...
You think maybe penalties.
But better to go out like that
than reach penalties and lose. -Yes.
-But that’s the usual "what if".
It was a big shock.
I even cried on the pitch.
Didn’t think I’d... -Show that.
-... show that on the pitch.
I opened there and emotions
came out because of the loss.
You think 2008, 2012, always close,
but there's no breakthrough.
You wonder how much time is left.
-Yes, yes. -When will we do it?
We were burdened by your
generation. We were always told:
"Bronze, bronze, bronze."
You inspired us. -Yes.
We looked up to idols growing up.
-Later it became a burden.
Later it became heavy,
because it was always there.
You say "leave us alone".
We’re a new generation,
making our path. We’ll see
what we do, don’t pressure us.
They were special. Our idols.
Inspiration... -But you already
play in top clubs. -We play...
You play in better clubs than us.
Yes, but we weren’t mature yet.
-Like in 1996 we weren’t...
Possible. To achieve something big.
But it came, thank God, two years later.
You, even in 2008, when you
were young, as we said earlier,
took a third-minute penalty
against hosts Austria.
You’re a leader on the pitch,
but you’re not loud.
Later when Niko Kovač retired
and I wanted you to take number 10,
at first... didn’t want it...
You were always a leader
on the pitch, but not loud off it.
Fun, part of the group.
In the group you’re a leader. Of course.
But you don’t insist on others,
except on the pitch. -Yes.
So after Euro 2016,
Darijo Srna was a top captain.
You helped him, and you were
among the captains too. -Yes.
You were great. Darijo leaves and
you become the captain. Russia game.
And you... as the book says, I didn’t
know this either. You decide to take
some things into your own hands,
like conflicts, though it sounds silly,
with Mandžo, and other non-football
matters. Tell us about that. -Yes.
They labelled me. They threw at me
"he’s small, skinny, won’t make it".
On the other hand, when I reached
certain levels, "not a leader,
he lacks this, he’s not the one."
But I have that inside me.
At some point you think
you shouldn’t show it,
because you don’t want
to break the hierarchy.
You know who the captain is.
Hierarchy must be respected.
But when something
had to be said, I said it.
I prefer and look up more
to leaders by example, not words,
so you do things that sometimes
go against my views and rules
that I have in my head. I always
tried to be that kind of leader.
When I became captain...
I spoke about 2014, then 2016,
which was better, but with some
players I’d been through a lot
and had small disagreements.
Whether because of me or them,
or some statements. As the feeling
grew that this might be our last
World Cup, a chance for the
generation to do something big,
players were in big clubs.
They were not just numbers there,
but protagonists, very important
players of those big clubs.
Juventus, Milan, Real, Barça...
-Inter. -Inter, Monaco... -Liverpool.
Liverpool. Incredible. With Mandžo
I hadn’t spoken for years.
I had, but not like before.
Then, at my insistence,
before preparations and games
against Liverpool, Senegal,
I think we were in Opatija,
if I’m not wrong,
I talked to him. I resolved our issue.
In the end it was something
really trivial, but... -Doesn’t matter.
I let it run its course,
he did the same.
Then it became something
that seemed unsolvable.
When we finally sat and talked,
it was a small thing. We fixed it.
I was relieved, probably him too.
The second case was with Čarli,
because of some statements
that didn’t suit me.
We didn’t discuss it deeply.
A bit by phone,
but I don’t like discussing
some things by phone.
I prefer face to face,
1 on 1, to clarify the issue.
We fixed that too. I freed myself
from those burdens I had inside.
I went to that World Cup
with a clear mind.
I had a feeling, Vanja can
confirm what I told her,
that we’d do great things
at that World Cup.
I told her on Ivano’s birthday,
before our match with Brazil
and before the World Cup. -Yes.
A very important thing was
Zlatko Dalić arriving. He did and
still does phenomenal things. -Yes.
When did you feel that special
something? What did he bring?
When did you feel it... You told
Vanja, right? Before preparations?
Before World Cup camp.
-You feel something’s coming. -Yes.
Was that before or after your talks
with Čarli and Mandžukić?
But you decided you’d talk.
-No, with Vanja, after.
Before the Senegal match in Osijek...
-Then you got two days off.
I flew... my son Ivano had
a birthday, I went there.
Next day we stayed, I had to
return, and we played Liverpool.
And Brazil. -Yes.
What were we saying? -That’s when
you felt it... and Zlatko arrived.
Zlatko arrived practically
at the airport, a day before
the match vs Ukraine where
only a win was acceptable.
Exactly. -I didn’t know him.
I knew he coached Rijeka,
Varaždin and those clubs.
He was abroad too.
But our first talk, I felt some
incredibly good energy.
His calmness... -His composure.
-Composure. We were all stressed.
Maybe we wouldn’t qualify, which
would be tragic for such a generation
and such players. He brought
calm and good energy.
He asked for opinions on how
we should play, he said his ideas.
It was a pleasant talk... -Cooperation.
-Phenomenal cooperation from day one.
Against Ukraine we
played a great match.
We needed to win just to
play play-offs. -Da.
Against... -Greece. -Greece. Of course,
we smashed Greece completely.
Especially in Zagreb, away game
was a draw. There we...
A good group started forming,
but then came the US camp.
We lost to Peru then. That’s when
Čarli’s statement happened.
Some of us went back to clubs,
we didn’t play vs Mexico.
He said what he said.
He shouldn’t have, he knows it.
It passed, everything
was smoothed out.
Again stories started that this
isn’t the team, this isn’t...
Doubts. But I’m not someone
for big announcements.
"We’ll do this, that." I simply
felt we’d do good things.
I told Vanja before going back
to the national team.
We talked how, what, because
she didn’t go to the first games.
She thought we’d fall out
in the group. Not because
she didn’t believe. She likes
to provoke to give motivation.
I told her we’ll play a great
tournament, do something big.
I’ll be the best. -Come on.
-Ask her, you’ll hear.
That’s how it was. I never say
I’ll be this or that. Never.
But I said it then, before I left.
In the end we did great things.
I was player of the tournament.
I had a good feeling.
We said already. A career lasts
as long as it lasts.
We know what the national team
means to you, how special
you feel every time you play.
Each time feels like the first
and it "charges" you to keep playing
at that level in your club. -Yes.
But an important moment
of your national team career
is the penalty vs Denmark.
That’s... exactly, blow, blow.
Impossible. Everything was
in that one moment.
Like that series with Ivanišević
in the Wimbledon final.
You miss a penalty in stoppage...
-118th minute. -... that would pass you.
Sure. -Or Turkey again.
-Not for sure, we learned something.
And again penalties. You don’t
feel like doing it, but you must.
You must as team leader.
If you refuse, you’re already down.
The team loses confidence.
-Yes. -But I think that...
That match, that penalty,
shows my character.
It describes my character when
someone asks what I’m like,
what my strongest traits are...
-Yes. -I think that match
describes enough my character.
Of course, that miss...
I was furious I missed.
I had a good feeling.
I simply missed, but stayed calm
however much it burned in me.
It wasn’t like vs Turkey when we
scored in 119th minute
and already saw ourselves
in the quarterfinal.
They equalise and then penalties.
We were totally unfocused.
As if we had already lost, even
though you still have penalties.
We were younger, totally unfocused.
That’s why we missed three penalties.
In this situation I stayed calm
and knew I wanted to do it.
And you’re 10 years older. -Older,
of course. -Raketa, you, the others.
I wanted to take responsibility,
I wanted to take the penalty.
I know it would be different if I didn’t.
A big handicap going forward.
For a captain to step away
when it’s hardest...
It wasn’t about my career,
but that penalty...
It defined a lot. -I’d be like
Roberto Baggio.
He’s always reminded of ’94.
I’d be marked by that penalty.
Already at that time I wasn’t
rated highly in Croatia
because of things outside football.
That penalty was... -Everything.
Everything was in that moment.
Maybe one of the most important moments
in my national team career. -For sure.
Not for a moment did I have
any negative thoughts. Not once.
I was confident I'd score.
That morning, we never watch penalties,
but after the meeting ended,
a few of us stayed. Mrma too.
He showed us how Schmeichel
saves penalties.
We watch. The guy dives,
a fantastic goalkeeper, normally,
but he goes one way
for a minute and a half.
Incredible. None of the penalties
were even close.
I said that morning, if we get
a penalty, I'll strike down the middle.
And then in the 120th minute,
the penalty comes. That's the mind.
I don’t strike down the middle,
but the way I did.
And he caught it "alive".
In the shootout it barely went in.
I had it in my head.
So yeah, the mind is wild.
Alright. After Denmark comes Russia,
then that trance match vs England.
And the final and everything.
You were named the best player, right?
Was it already then... Did you...
When did you first think
that you might win
the Ballon d’Or? -Honestly? Never.
Not because I didn’t believe
I deserved it,
but you’re playing in the era
of two "beasts", Cristiano and Messi,
no one can match them.
Goals, assists, trophies.
Any way you look at it.
It never crossed my mind.
For me, individual... Team trophies
are always before individual ones.
Team awards ahead of individual ones.
I never even thought
that I could win the Ballon d’Or,
that I could be the best and so on.
But you were the best at the World Cup.
-I was the best player at the World Cup.
They were there too. -One of the
happiest individual moments.
Best player of the World Cup.
I was so sad because of it,
because we lost the final.
I’d give anything to win the final.
That fulfils me more.
But I didn’t think of the Ballon d’Or.
Later I started thinking about it
when people from France Football came
and said there might be a chance.
I thought OK, there’s a chance,
but unlikely. You think Ronaldo
or Messi will win it. -A monopoly.
They had it for 10 years. -For ten
years they just alternated.
But then when the phone rang...
-What can I say.
One of the most beautiful
moments of my career.
Winning the Ballon d’Or.
When you see who won it
and to be among them is incredible.
They told me a month before,
at France Football, the director came
to Madrid and said there’s a chance,
I’m in contention for the Ballon d’Or.
But they’d call only if I actually won it.
Only then. They won’t call to say
I didn’t win or that I was second.
They’ll call only if I win.
OK. I ask what’s the status.
They say they don’t know yet,
but there’s a chance.
That’s when I started imagining
how good it would be.
We played Nations League in London
against England, lost 2-1.
I stayed in London that night,
we had time off.
When I woke around 10
in the morning, phone rings.
France Football. -Come on. -I look
at the phone... -Did it hit you then? -Yes.
They said they’d call.
Tears came, Vanja next to me.
She says answer. I say no.
Let me calm down. Leave me a bit.
You're crazy, answer.
I let it ring out and didn’t answer.
Five minutes passed and then...
The feeling is unreal.
Now I call them.
I think they’ll say you were close,
but not this time.
He says you won the Ballon d’Or.
It was... An incredible moment.
An amazing feeling.
The worst is you can’t
tell anyone. -How long?
It was November, and the ceremony
was December 1st, something like that.
Not to say the wrong date.
-Enough days to go crazy. -Two weeks.
For two weeks you’re not
allowed to tell anyone.
Vanja knew, and my family
kept asking…
Every day someone asks you, because
people are talking about it. -Yeah.
…a month before it happens,
everyone keeps asking about that.
When I found out,
they asked even more.
I kept saying, "I have no idea",
but inside I was dying to tell them.
That day the president, Florentino,
called me and told me I’d won,
even though I already knew,
they had informed him too.
We talked a bit, he congratulated me.
I only told Mateo,
because he’s very close to me
and one of the few people
I can tell everything to.
And even though I was thinking about
whether I should say it or not,
I just couldn’t keep it from him.
We have that kind of relationship,
I basically tell him everything.
He knows everything about me,
and I know everything about him,
so I told him too.
Right near the end, I told my parents,
my uncle, and my close friends.
Not everyone. -And Ronaldo…
I wanted to leave some
room for others to come
and see firsthand for themselves.
-That’s the same with the Ballon d'Or.
It speaks volumes about you.
That Ballon d'Or is when everyone
was simply happy that you won it.
Well, yes. But of course, when
I look at it, there are always people
who say I'm not Ronaldo or Messi,
and then there are some statistics...
That’s today’s world.
-It wasn’t like that back then...
Well, but... -No, not back then.
This was unanimous, people were
genuinely happy about it.
Yes, I know, I know...
You know, I’m just saying there are
always people like that...
But that doesn’t bother me,
I couldn’t care less.
Such things do not affect me.
I know I had an incredible season,
both with the national team
and with Real Madrid. I played...
I don’t like talking like that,
but I really played football at an
exceptional level those several years,
so not just the year of the Ballon d'Or,
but the two years before it as well.
Yes, but even back then, you know...
The votes were overwhelmingly
in my favor,
so the difference was really huge,
and it wasn’t a coincidence.
6:2, you know... -It's like tennis
terminology. Yes, exactly.
I don't like being pathetic,
and I know you don’t either,
but I keep thinking whether I should
ask you this, but I have to.
At that time, during the Russia World
Cup, that video of you and the sheep
by Pavle Balenović surfaced.
I thought it was so strong, I even
thought it might have been manipulated.
No, no. It wasn’t.
-But it’s incredible.
In those moments when the whole world
was trying to explain how Croatia,
through you, was showing how a small
country could achieve something,
and you were the leader of that.
Everyone was trying to explain
and find reasons for it,
and that photo actually
shows everything,
where you see both mysticism
and control, confidence,
danger, and calmness...
It’s like a match.
Yes, it was. It felt like a match.
You control the situation
like it’s a match. It's incredible.
Did you know about that photo
before it went public?
I knew about the photo. I had
seen it before. My father has it.
I saw it a long time ago, but
I haven’t seen it since I was maybe
10, 12 or 15 years old, doesn’t
matter... I haven’t seen it since.
But then, at that moment, I actually
thought my dad had posted it somehow,
but that was unimaginable, because
he never does things like that.
But then, it was Pavle who posted it,
and someone must have
realized it was me.
The photo really brought back
memories and emotions
because it’s truly incredible.
I knew it existed, but I didn’t know
it would come out at that time.
I used to walk there alongside goats
with my dad’s jacket,
17 sizes too big for me,
always lifting it up with a stick...
We did that often,
so it’s one of those photos taken
when we were shooting back then,
but we often did that.
That explains everything. It all makes
sense. It’s like a match situation.
There’s danger,
but you’re going to solve it.
You have control, concentration,
calmness, simplicity...
No panic, unbelievable...
Yes, and now, after the Ballon d'Or,
that you got at 33 years old,
after the World Cup, it seems like
the perfect time to enjoy a little,
maybe put your feet up, right?
Maybe consider China or America,
a bit of relaxation, as they say.
But you said no, you went full throttle
again, setting high goals for yourself.
Yes, that’s me. I’m never satisfied,
I always think I can do more, better.
And practically, after 2018, there were
even more incredible successes
that maybe weren’t expected,
both on the national team level,
in the club, and individually.
It’s all because I’m not
satisfied with small things...
I always want to prove myself,
and even today it’s still like that.
I don’t have to prove anything to anyone,
but I want to prove myself.
I want to show that I can still
be at a certain level…
Every day feels like you’re
being tested. -Yeah, exactly.
I started playing football out of love,
and that’s still how I see football.
I never thought I’d have
what I have today.
I just wanted to play football,
enjoy it, and be happy.
That’s what fulfills me,
and because of that, even today,
I want to play at these levels.
Because that was always my dream.
I could’ve gone to other leagues,
easier leagues… -That’s the same sport.
And it’s hard to win something,
no matter where you go.
Yeah, but you don’t get that feeling,
it’s not the same atmosphere,
it’s not the Champions League,
it’s not what I’m experiencing now in Milan.
That fulfills me.
Things like that, not the money…
-Money comes on its own. -Yeah.
Of course you’ll look for the best
conditions you can get,
but the money comes.
But that was never my main goal,
and I never thought-again, I repeat,
that I’d have everything I have today.
I didn’t think about that.
Maybe that’s why I still last
at these levels today,
because of that love… -That passion…
-The passion I have for football.
That’s 100% true, absolutely solid.
But it seems like you
surprised yourself a little.
What you just said
is exactly my next thought,
and I’d like you to comment on it.
So, the Ballon d’Or happened,
the World Cup, four Champions Leagues,
and then you write a book.
The book is top.
You and Robert Mateoni-great book…
You were in England, where it’s completely
normal for a player during his career,
if he’s a star like Rooney,
Beckham and others,
to publish several books.
Five or six of them.
Rooney wrote one when he was
at Everton, another one before
the World Cup in Germany,
and so on… You didn’t do it that way.
And second, in Europe and in our region,
a book is usually written
at the peak, at the end. -Yeah.
When everything is over,
so we have it all recorded.
In your case it’s a paradox.
You thought that was your peak,
and it turned out that your
biggest achievements came in 2018,
and that was the middle of your
Real Madrid career, right? -Yeah.
From 2012 that’s six years,
and then another six afterwards. -Yeah.
It’s evenly split in half.
And as you said, after the World Cup,
you won two Champions Leagues
and a few La Ligas. -Yeah, two or three.
And with the national team,
okay it wasn’t a final,
but you did win third place
and reached the Nations League final.
What I want to say is…
Did you surprise yourself
that it continued this intensely,
this successfully, and for this long?
It’s hard for me to give an answer to that,
whether I surprised myself.
I don’t know.
Maybe I surprised myself
in a physical sense.
I didn’t expect to be in such good
physical condition at this age.
Maybe that’s the only thing
that surprised me a bit,
even though I dedicated everything
to staying physically strong,
as I said at the start,
with that individual trainer,
when I raised my physical capacities.
And you changed your diet too, right?
-I eat better, I rest more.
I work on prevention,
I haven’t had many injuries…
Even with everything I was doing,
I didn’t expect to be
at this physical level.
-But age catches up, right? -Yeah.
Maybe that’s where I did
surprise myself.
But I didn’t write the book because
I thought, "Well, this is the end.
Nothing else is going
to happen after this."
It was simply Robi’s idea,
because we’ve had
a good relationship for a long time.
And he always mentioned to me
that I should write that book
and that everything should be documented.
But I kept postponing it.
"I’ll start tomorrow,
there’s time," and so on.
But he was pretty persistent.
He kept insisting, and I said,
"Okay, let’s do it."
The book came out in 2019,
but not because I thought it was the end.
So I wrote it, and thankfully
the book was well received.
It’s just a shame that during that period
Covid appeared, so we couldn’t
do a few promotions, especially
in England and other countries.
But the book was well received…
-…And it stays forever.
Yeah, it remains forever.
I’m proud of it in the end.
Even though I needed some convincing,
once I finally decide to do something,
I end up being glad later. -Yeah.
-And I’m glad about this as well.
Great. We’ll talk a bit more.
You’re a perfect example of this,
and I ask all my guests this,
and all of you are great in your own way,
and I’m privileged to have you here.
You are, as we said, a creative player,
an artist, you have a feel
for the game, technique…
It’s like you have rear-view mirrors.
You never know from which side
someone will attack you,
you don’t even turn around,
but you feel it.
But at the same time, you work
incredibly hard. You’re responsible…
When you compare work and talent,
what’s the balance there,
if you want to become
really successful in sports?
When we were younger and part
of the youth national teams,
we had coaches, instructors,
like Martin Novoselac,
Ivica Grnja, Mladen Brnčić…
-Gudelj and the others…
Ivan Gudelj, yes.
And something Martin Novoselac
said stuck with me forever.
Talent is 20%, and everything else
is hard, grueling work. Sacrifice.
And at that age,
it all sounds kind of abstract,
and you don’t fully understand
what he’s telling you.
But at the end of the day,
I agree with that statement,
that talent may be 20%,
and the rest is work.
Hard work, building yourself up, sacrifice,
full focus on what you’re doing.
All of that is necessary to succeed,
talent alone isn’t enough.
Talent is a big plus,
but without work, talent is nothing.
But you’re still born as Modrić.
-Yeah, but even then…
Even Tesla wouldn’t have
been Tesla without work.
Without work there’s no success,
that’s not even up for debate,
but you also can’t ignore talent
and say that everyone today
can do everything.
-No, of course not.
You can’t become Modrić
just by training. -Of course.
In my opinion… -You can only become
the best version of yourself.
Of course it’s hard without talent.
There are cases where people
achieved something
through work alone. -There are.
But if you have enough talent,
the kind God gives you,
like He thankfully gave to me
and to others,
I know because I lived through it…
In my generation there were
unbelievably talented players,
even bigger and better talents than me,
players people expected a lot from…
I’m not so sure about that…
At that time they expected
much more from them than from me.
I know that. I’m not sure whether
that’s just people’s claims or opinions.
But I knew them, I played with players
who were truly incredible.
But in the end, they didn’t make it.
Whether it was because they worked less…
Sometimes things
just don’t fall into place.
Or maybe at a certain moment
things just didn’t align for them,
but that work is extremely important, yes.
And without talent it’s hard,
of course. -Yeah.
But I think that percentage,
that ratio, might be even higher,
but what’s certain is
that you have to work a lot.
The percentage doesn’t matter.
What matters is that
both things are important. -Yes.
But there’s another category
that all of these people share,
these people I call
champions or monsters.
It’s that passion you keep mentioning
all the time, at dinner, now again.
All I hear is "passion, passion."
It’s simply an obsession with it.
Let me tell a story, something
that happened after a match,
which shows your character perfectly.
It was after the Real-Chelsea game.
A shocking match, a comeback…
Chelsea go up 2-0, 3-0…
-Even 4-0, but the goal got disallowed.
Exactly, even 4-0…
It was unbelievable.
There were extra-time periods,
all sorts of things.
The match finished really late.
You got home at 2 a.m.,
maybe you didn’t even sleep. -Yeah.
And the next day Atletico play City,
which I’m going to watch, but you’re not.
But we’re meeting for lunch.
My friend Kenneth from Gibraltar,
Leo-my son-you and me.
For lunch, not dinner. It was March,
I think that’s when the quarterfinals
were played. Maybe it was April…
Anyway, there were about
ten league rounds left in La Liga.
You were first, but Barcelona
were always there.
And Leo, my son, asks you at one moment:
"Luka, do you think you’ll finish first?"
And I, who’ve known you
my whole life, I was stunned.
Because you... maybe I'll get
the name of the club wrong,
but you said something like:
"You know what, Leo,
now we play at home against Getafe,
and Barcelona play against Sevilla.
Then we play at home against Celta,
and they play away…"
And you went through
eight rounds like that,
who you play, who they play… -Yeah.
And then you said:
"We’re going to Sevilla,
and if we win there, we’re champions."
This is happening in this new era,
where it’s totally normal
for a player to say
he doesn’t follow football,
he doesn’t watch matches,
he watches NFL and baseball instead,
and football is just his job. -Yeah.
But that passion and love
you have for football…
That’s why I always repeat it.
The love and passion I have
for football is huge.
It’s my job, it’s my life,
so how am I not supposed to know
who we play in six or seven rounds,
and who our biggest rival plays?
So that I can know what they need,
what we need,
and whether we have
a chance to be champions.
I simply live football,
not just when I train
and finish a session,
but also afterwards.
I watch other matches,
I record other opponents
that we’re going to play against…
And that’s still the same today.
I don’t do it less now, it’s the same.
-You would do it for free.
Of course, because I love it. That’s
what keeps me going even today.
People always ask me:
"How? What’s the secret?"
There’s no secret. Simply,
the love and passion I feel
for football is unbelievable.
Not just for the matches,
but even for ordinary training sessions.
My family, even Vanja,
sometimes says to me:
"How? Until when?
How do you have the energy?"
It’s just my life.
Someone is lucky if their career
lasts 10-15 years at a high level.
For me, thank God,
it’s lasted 20 years.
Next year will mark 20 years
since I joined the national team.
Unbelievable. -Which is amazing.
So as long as I feel
good and think clearly,
I want to keep playing football.
Because I know I can’t play it
until I’m 70 like some people
who do other kinds of jobs,
they do what they love
for 50-60 years.
Unfortunately, we don't
have that privilege.
We have to find other jobs later,
and that's not easy.
After the adrenaline, your schedule becomes
organized from A to Z, every single day.
And you want to be important?
Yes, you want to stay at some level,
to be important.
And not on some margins?
People think that it's about finances,
but it's not like that.
You can't go fishing after that, although
there are cases like that. -There are.
I respect those who make such decisions,
but it's like I just said.
And then these questions annoy you:
"How long will you play?"
These are not questions from
the last 2-3 years, it has been going on
without exaggeration,
since 2018 or 2019.
"You’re old, when will you finnish,
when will you stop?"
And that motivated me.
Of course, it annoys me when someone
asks me that every time.
They put some prejudices on me,
but I was never swayed,
nor did it matter to me what someone
said about the end of my career...
And time for youth.
Okay, I don’t take up anyone’s
space. I’m ready to fight.
I’ve never asked for privileges
no matter what I’ve done,
I don’t have to have a guaranteed
place or have to play.
No, if someone is better,
let them play.
I’m here to fight and prove that it’s
not like that, that I can be "the one".
That’s that love and responsibility.
Two years ago in Arabia,
I had an Armenian,
Zelarayan, on my team.
The guy is from Argentina, however,
he is originally from Armenia,
but he can't play for Argentina,
only for Armenia.
You called me when Armenia
and Wales played for the Euro.
If Wales wins that last game,
Croatia goes to the play-offs. -Yes.
We lost to Wales, right?
You told me to tell Zelarayan
to give it his all.
The game is in 20 days.
You have the Champions League
at the same time,
but you thought about that too.
You can's find that any more...
But that’s how it was.
-Yes, that's how it was,
you gave him the jersey and...
It was 1:1.
So, football is great,
but do you follow all sports? -I do.
Which one do you think he would
succeed in? In basketball, right?
I think so.
Maybe the problem is my height.
-What would you be there for then?
But I think it’s still basketball.
I like playing tennis, I've never
trained, but I'm good at it.
But I still prefer basketball, because
I'm from the city of basketball, Zadar.
In my childhood, when I wasn't playing
football, it was always basketball.
It wasn't tennis, because tennis came
later. I'm good at several sports.
But basketball always came
after football.
Every time after training
we go to play basketball,
because there were a lot of courts
in the neighborhoods,
you look for the one that has two
on two, one on one, and you play.
So, do you prefer team sports?
-Yes, I prefer team sports.
I respect individual sports too,
especially tennis, but I prefer team sports.
You've been to several countries and
played with different nationalities?
Do you think that we from these areas,
it doesn't matter if it's Bosnian,
Croat, Slovene, Serb or Macedonian,
do we have that "something special"?
If we have that, what is it?
Well, I think we have
"something special".
And what is that "special"?
Character! We are fighters,
we never give up.
Maybe that sets us apart from others
in this area. I don't know...
But I think we have "something special".
It's hard for me to answer.
Maybe you know it better?
The conditions are not ideal
and we have to fight.
Well, that could be it, but...
-You don't have 100 fields. -Yes...
But we didn't have better conditions
so we would know what it's like.
Maybe if we had better conditions,
we wouldn't be so good?
How do I know? -Well, we certainly
wouldn't be better. -You think so?
I’m one hundred percent
convinced of that.
If everything was provided for you,
if you had a hundred fields...
When you were little, there was
only one ball and one playground.
You had to wait,
fight with your elders or win.
That's possible, but we didn't have
better to know what was better...
Maybe it would have been better,
or maybe it wouldn't have been.
True. -It's pointless to discuss it...
-That's true, 100%...
Growing up was tough...
We didn't have much and
that made us special.
And tougher. -Yes.
-That's harder.
It’s harder to succeed, easier to give up.
And say: "I can't!"
When there's no hot water,
I don't want to take a cold shower.
I don’t want to train anymore.
It's harder...
But when the challenges
and difficulties are over,
then that success is wonderful.
-Yes, it’s a special feeling.
Yes, you know that you deserved it
and that nobody gave you anything.
You're an ideal example,
because your career at the top level
has lasted 20 years.
Football has changed significantly.
I think it has changed more
in the last ten years
than in the previous fifty years,
like the world itself, mobile phones
and everything...
How do you compare it,
where do you see its changes?
Do you like this new positional
football more?
A lot of people are going back to
the romantic times, to the old days.
Parents told us that it was
better before.
You are the protagonist,
you were here and there.
No need to be jealous? -Yes. -You were
at the top level then and now.
Every time has its advantages.
Sometimes I like to go back to
that past and say that it was good.
But every time has its advantages
and disadvantages.
Football is still special to me,
just like it is today.
Maybe there are more matches today,
but they are accessible.
And they are watched more,
you can watch a match every day.
But it wasn't like that before.
You could watch one or two games
during the weekend. -That's right.
Or in the meantime, one match.
And everyone could hardly
wait to watch that game.
And today, every game is available.
Even in some other countries,
you can watch it if you want.
And that's the difference.
But as for football, I had a good time
at that time, but also now.
I enjoy football and it's a pleasure
for me to watch it.
Just as it was a pleasure for me to
watch it before, just as I play it now.
Nothing has changed
in that regard. -Yes.
Every time brings good
and less good things.
How do you view these new generations?
Janica recently said in an interview
that she doesn't know
if she would succeed if she
had to start in these new times.
Everything is under supervision,
everything is pressurised...
And those social networks...
Every step is under surveillance.
Is it harder for the players now
or not? -Yes, it is, it is much harder.
Before, you could go out more relaxed,
take a walk and have a good time,
without thinking whether someone
will take a photograph of you
or whether you will be
in the newspapers.
Will I do something?
But today, whatever you do,
it is immediately published in the media.
I don't like that, but simply, we live
in such times where social networks
have become very important
and essential.
Honestly, I don't like that, but we
have to follow trends and adapt.
That's true, but I used to have
a better time. And I was more relaxed.
I could talk to my friends, but now
everyone has a phone in their hand.
When they finish the match, first thing
the players do is take the phone.
Right away, yes. -That's right,
we don't talk about the match
or about what could have been better.
What was done well and what was not.
It used to be like that until
there were no telephones.
We talked about the match,
about what you were doing.
And it's a difference. That's why
earlier it was surely more beautiful,
but now it just is. We have to adapt.
Progress is being made...
You don't seem to belong to this time,
as they used to say…
"A six or an eight, it's a shame,
he left for this or that."
That's what they say now, that there are
no such responsible players.
You are special and that
should be emphasized.
That's why I called you
when you beat Napoli,
two or three weeks ago
with a score of 2:1
So, a red card, a penalty and 30 minutes
to the end, not 5. -And more.
I have to tell you, if it weren't for you,
I feel that they would have lost
with a score of 3:2.
Regardless of whether you cleared
2 goals from the line
or created 6 chances for your forward.
Simply, you have that responsibility.
I know that as a coach,
but I was also a player...
There is a player's responsibility
and a coach's responsibility.
Both want to win.
A player wants to win,
because he has a certain
limit of sacrifice to make that.
And the coach has maximum
responsibility for everything.
You are the person on the field
who leads and suffers,
as if he is the only one responsible
for a possible defeat. -That's right.
But that's not there anymore today.
There used to be a lot more of that.
Not just Roy Keane
and players like that...
That was somehow the standard.
Today that's gone. -Yes. -100%.
When you look at your path,
which you mentioned during
the conversation,
and everything you've been through,
if you had to go through it again,
would you be scared?
You would simply think
it was a movie. It's hard.
Yes, it's hard, but it's sweet.
And I wouldn't change anything,
if I don’t know what will happen.
I would like to go through this same
path again that I have. -Sure.
I am proud and happy...
-And you should be.
... about what I have achieved so far
and the way I have achieved it.
With the people who helped
me on that path.
Of course, you can't do it all alone.
You need coaches, parents,
wife and fans. Some contributed
less, some more...
I am grateful for that help
and for everything
they gave for me on that path.
So I am proud and happy and I really
wouldn't change anything.
Do you think you would
have succeeded like this
if you had been born 100 meters
from the Bernabeu?
It's hard to know, but knowing
myself and my character,
and if I had been born
next to the Bernabeu,
I think I would have done something.
Regardless the difference.
I simply wanted to succeed.
I had my dreams, my desires
and I followed them. I didn't let
anything on that path stop me.
Nor for anyone to tell me that
I can't do it. And to give up...
No, I believed in myself
and blindly followed my path.
That's right. Yes. -That's it.
And you had the support of your family?
-And that's the most important support.
In those moments...
-Some things come together.
Which ones you provoke.
Nothing is impossible without the other.
But you have to believe in yourself.
Today it's popular for everyone
to criticize and drag you down.
They don't want you to succeed.
If you accept that thinking and if it
destabilizes you, then it's difficult.
That's why you need to move away
from those thoughts, not listen to them.
Especially if the prevailing opinion
is not your own opinion of yourself.
But it’s hard today to be under
the influence of social media.
Yes, it's much harder, because
you read every comment.
But... you just have to be strong.
You have to be stronger than
that and parents have to talk
to their children too. -Yes.
You have three children?
Are they all in sports?
The younger one, Sofi, no,
but she practices another sport,
ballet and rhythmic gymnastics…
But she is still young.
Ema is into soccer
and she is excellent.
Now how much she wants to continue...
For now she is interested
in it and she likes it.
And Ivano too, he likes soccer.
At first he wasn't that interested,
when I forced him...
Later I realized that I shouldn't do that.
He should decide what he wants.
The most important thing for me is that
they are happy, whatever they do.
To be happy in sports
or any other profession,
just that they are happy
and that they enjoy it.
And that they give their best
in whatever they do.
And not that they do something halfway.
I don't like that, it irritates me,
when something is done halfway.
No matter what it is. So... I don't force
them, I let them choose.
I'm here to support them.
They have to be happy and enjoy it.
-Will you support them professionally?
Of course. Whatever they choose,
I'm here to support them.
But when they choose something,
they have to give their best in it,
and not do it halfway...
And that's the only thing I ask of them.
And the last question,
how do you and Vanja deal
with this problem of mobile phones,
social networks, this scourge?
It's hard, it's not easy.
Everyone around them has had
phones since they were young.
Until they were a little older,
they didn’t have a mobile phone.
And then every day they asked,
"Why don't we have one
and others have one?"
It wasn't easy to deal with it,
but we managed to some extent.
We didn't give them mobile phones
until they were a little older.
We try to keep it to a minimum
when they have weekly classes.
Or they only have their phones
for an hour after school.
On weekends, we allow them
to use their phones a little longer,
because you can't completely
cut them off from it.
They will be isolated from
society then. -Isolated, yes.
When you ask them why they're
constantly on their mobile phones,
they say, "You're constantly
on your mobile phone too."
And what should you tell them?
They are good, they listen, but we
still can't completely isolate them.
It's a daily struggle.
-It's a daily struggle, conversations...
It's not easy, but we try
to lead them on the right path.
To give them the right values,
like my parents did for me.
That they be humble
and respect their elders.
That's the most important thing for me.
That they have those right values.
My Luka, well done, congratulations!
-Thank you, the pleasure is mine.